 BEFORE THE APPEALS PANEL OF THE PRESS COUNCIL OF SOUTH AFRICA In the matter between: NEWS24                                                                                                                APPLICANT AND CONRAD GALLAGHER                                                                                RESPONDENT MATTER NO: 9375/12/2021 DECISION Regarding the breach of section 1.1 of the Code Regarding the breach of article 1.8 of the Code: Failure to give right of reply 9.1 The respondent is clearly a seasoned international business person. If he felt that the time given was not reasonable, he could have said so, and asked for an extension; but he did not do that; instead he simply said he would respond in due course. 9.2 The questions related to respondent’s businesses and therefore to matters within his personal knowledge. This must have conveyed to the appellant that the respondent was in a position to reply as he had promised, especially as he had not asked for an extension. He knew that the intention was to publish the story after 36 hours. 9.3 In his papers in support of his case that the period given was too short, the respondent does not indicate, let alone with any motivation, as to what would have in the circumstances been a reasonable period. Had he done so, we would have been in a position to contrast the period he suggested with the 36 hours given to him by the appellant. During argument, it was conceded on behalf of the respondent that there was no evidence that he engaged with the questions posed or made any attempt to respond to them in any meaningful manner. It is difficult to see how an argument that the 36 hours is unreasonable can be sustained if there is no evidence that the respondent attempted to respond but was unable to do so. The mere fact that he was travelling is insufficient, given that most of the questions related to matters within the personal knowledge of the respondent. This raises a serious question whether he had any genuine intention of responding, as he put it, “in due course”. 10. It was also argued that either before or after the expiry of the 36 hours, the appellant should have returned to the respondent to tell him that the appellant was otherwise going to go ahead and publish. Firstly, this argument would fall away anyway once it is established that the period given was reasonable. Secondly, it would render the deadline meaningless. The clear intention of stipulating the 36 hours within which to respond was to alert the respondent that he had until that period to respond. The subject of a critical rapportage cannot determine his or her own deadline to manipulate the timing of publication, otherwise embarrassing articles would never see the light of day. The argument that the respondent needed time to consult with his records does not assist his case; if anything, it makes it worse: if he genuinely wanted time for that, he should have asked for an extension, something he did not do or give any explanation why he did not. The issue of whether the subject of critical reportage  was given reasonable time to respond will depend upon, amongst other factors, the context, the nature of the reportage, the nature and complexity of the questions posed, and whether any meaningful and genuine attempts were made by the person to whom questions are posed to engage with them and reply. It will also be relevant for the party contending that the period provided for a response is unreasonable to stipulate what  a reasonable period would be. The objective of clause 1.8 of the Code is not to delay the publication but rather to provide the subject of critical reportage a fair opportunity to reply. Whether a reasonable period has been given for a response will depend on the facts and circumstances of the case. In this instance we are of the view that the 36 hours given to the respondent to reply was reasonable. 11. We therefore disagree with the Deputy Ombud that reasonable time was not given and therefore that there was a contravention of section 1.8 of the Code. In the circumstances, the following Order is made: 11.1 The Deputy Ombud’s finding that the appellant contravened the provisions of section 1.1 of the Press Code, and the sanction of                 apology imposed, are confirmed. 11.2 The Deputy Ombud’s finding that the appellant contravened the provisions of section 1.8 of the Press Code is hereby set aside. 11.3 The appellant is ordered to issue an apology to the respondent; 11.3.1 The apology to be submitted to the Executive Director within seven days                   of this Decision; 11.3.2 the headline should contain the word “apology”; and refer to the   complaint in this matter and must end with the sentence “Visit               www.presscouncil.org.za for the full finding”; 11.3.3 the apology must be published with the logo of the Press Council; 11.3.4 the apology to be approved by the Executive Director and be published by a date set by the Executive Director. Dated this 7th day of June 2022 Judge B M Ngoepe, Chair, Appeals Panel Prof K Govender, Public Representative Ms Judy Sandison, Media Representative For the appellant: Mr G Claassen For the respondent: Adv G Bester Instructed by Attorney Jerome Levitz  