 Complaint 9463 Ruling by the Deputy Press Ombud Date of articles:                     21 March 2022 Headline of publication:       “SSA DECLASSIFIED Rogue’s gallery: Those who stand accused of paralysing SA’s spy agency” Authors:                                 Azarrah Karrim, Kyle Cowan, Jeff Wicks, and Sipho Masondo Particulars Background “The Investigative Directorate, the police and a private forensic firm are investigating a litany of alleged crimes that occurred at the SSA over nearly a decade. Millions of rands were stolen, laws were broken. But those who perpetrated the alleged crimes are still at large.” “For years under former president Jacob Zuma’s tenure, members of the SSA fleeced the agency of billions under the guise of phoney intelligence-gathering operations, parallel projects and illegitimate recruitment processes that saw dubious individuals handed the power to spy on South Africans. “These activities occurred under the leadership of a handful of key officials and executives. They saw intelligence operations reach into the political realm and executive interference in operational activities allegedly for the benefit of one man – Zuma.” 8.1 He is employed as deputy coordinator for the National Intelligence Co-ordinating Committee (NICOC), which was allegedly appointed to by former SSA Minister Ayanda Dlodlo. Moodley acted as coordinator of the NICOC at a stage. 8.2 “Moodley is a controversial figure. In 2019, News24 and amaBhungane revealed that he had been seconded to the SSA from SITA. During a meeting with Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane, he had handed her a typed note containing the proposed wording for a change to the Constitution to alter the mandate of the Reserve Bank.” 8.3 “Mkhwebane included the wording verbatim in her CIEX/Absa life board matter report. She has been charged with perjury for allegedly lying to the courts during litigation seeking to set aside her report.” The complaint “The media shall: 1.2 Present news in context and in a balanced manner, without any intentional or negligent departure from the facts whether by distortion, exaggeration or misrepresentation, material omissions, or summarization; 1.3 Present only what may reasonably be true as fact; Opinions, allegations, rumours or suppositions shall be presented clearly as such.” Analysis Privacy “Their use of my image was never authorized by myself and is an invasion of my privacy. I submit that to the extent that these images were sourced from other websites, that these websites had my consent to use my image which News 24 did not. This effectively compromises my security when it is also stated that I am an employee of the State Security Agency.” “The Press Council is not a court of law. The Ombud cannot make a ruling on whether any party is guilty of criminal, unlawful, or unconstitutional conduct. This is the domain of the courts. The Press Council will only enforce the Press Code and pronounce on matters of ethics.” Comment 19.1 “News24 is working on a series of articles regarding allegewrongdoing and corruption at the State Security Agency. This includes allegations made against yourself in the media.” 19.2 “In 2019, News24 and AmaBhungane reported that you had been seconded to the SSA from SITA, and during a meeting with Public Protector Busisiwe Mkhwebane you handed her a typed note containing the proposed wording for a change to the Constitution to alter the mandate of the Reserve Bank. Is this correct? What is your response?” 19.3 “Mkhwebane went on to include the wording verbatim in her report on the CIEX/Absa life board matter and was subsequently charged with perjury. News24 and AmaBhungane reported at the time that the attempt to change the mandate of the SARB was perceived as a direct attack on the institution and that the SSA’s apparent involvement, through yourself, in attempting to change the SARB mandate, constituted potential evidence of an SSA operation against the SARB. What is your response to this?” “A subject of critical reportage who is afforded an opportunity to respond to allegations also has a measure of responsibility to clarify bona fide misunderstandings. This is particularly applicable when a subject believes the allegations being posed to him or her is factually incorrect. If a subject – despite his or her belief that the journalist has the wrong end of the stick – chooses not to respond, to be sketchy in his or her response, or even to lead a journalist down the garden path where there was a real misapprehension, he or she does so at their own peril.” Context 30.1 There is no justification to include him in the article as he a) did nothing wrong, and b) the allegations levelled against him has nothing to do with crimes committed at and/or the paralysis of the SSA. 30.2 There is no justification to label him a “controversial figure”. 30.3 By using his photo with the story, the reasonable reader associates him with crimes. 30.4 The story is behind News24’s paywall. Members of the public would not be able to read the entire article. Those readers are being misled by seeing his picture and only a selected except of the article. This is a distortion of facts. 31.1 The allegations were already previously published on News24. 31.2 Moodley was nevertheless afforded another opportunity to respond prior to publication. 31.3 The article was a “comprehensive list of those implicated in bringing the SA into disrepute.” Interference with the Public Protector investigation into the Reserve Bank constitutes such disrepute. “Headlines, Captions, Posters, Pictures and Video/Audio Content 10.1 Headlines, captions to pictures and posters shall not mislead the public and shall give a reasonable reflection of the contents of the report or picture in question.” 44.1 The same headline, being: “SSA DECLASSIFIED. Rogue’s gallery: Those who stand accused of paralysing SA’s spy agency.” 44.2 A picture of the gallery. 44.3 A caption to the picture, which reads: “Rogue’s gallery: Those who stand accused of paralysing SA’s spy agency” 44.4 A single paragraph in progressively faded font. It reads: “The Investigative Directorate, the police and a private forensic firm are investigating a litany of alleged crimes that occurred at the SSA over nearly a decade. Millions of rands were stolen, laws were broken. But those who perpetrated the alleged crimes are still at…(ineligible)” 44.5 An invitation to subscribe to read the remainder of the article and a free 14-days trial subscription. 49.1 As pointed out by News24, the ABSA/CIEX controversy speaks to the constitutional mandate of the SSA, whether that was breached, and therefore whether laws were broken. 49.2 The alleged politicisation of the SSA is central to the allegations now being investigated by a range of authorities and organisations, as the report highlights. Conclusion Appeal The Complaints Procedure lays down that within seven working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Herman Scholtz Deputy Press Ombud 13 June 2022 