  Complaint 9294 Ruling by the Deputy Press Ombud Date of articles:                  28 August 2021 (The Continent)  4 September 2021 (M&G online) Headline of publication:   Cabo Delgado is a warzone, but profiteers are doing a roaring trade // Cabo Delgado is a warzone, but profiteers strike it rich. Author:                               Luis Nhachote Particulars Complaint “It’s been four years since the insurgency began, forcing French oil giant Total Energies to stop its operations. But a recent study found that mining in the province has been forging ahead regardless.” Complaint 1: Lack of comment Complaint 2: “Gemfields paid Mwiriti [US] $2.5 million for 75%” “Despite formally having capital of just 30 000 meticals, and without any prior capabilities for exploitation of mineral resources or experience of the international market for precious stones, Gemfields paid Mwriti $2.5-million for 75% in the joint venture, MRM.” Complaint 3: Allegations of torture “Year after year MRM has been selling gems in international markets and making a huge profit. However, the mining operations have not been without controversy. Videos surfaced in 2012 following the torture of illegal miners who were digging for rubies in Nahamamumbir by Mozambique’s security forces (FDS) to ensure that they cleared the area… “In 2019, Gemfields agreed to pay $7.6-million in compensation to people living around its ruby mine in Montepuez, who allege they were the victims of human rights abuses by the police and security guards employed by Gemfields. “The company agreed to make the payment without admitting any liability, though it said it had been ‘proactive and constructive in addressing the wider issues raised by the local communities through this case’.” “It is true that Gemfields, on a no-admission-of liability basis, paid a settlement to clients of Leigh Day Solicitors in 2019 who had alleged that they suffered human rights abuses by police and private security at MRM’s concession. But this is not evidence that any such abuses actually took place… No evidence was ever presented in a court and no court ever made a finding that such abuses took place, let alone were attributable to Gemfields.” (My underlining) Complaint 4: The “recruited youths” “People in Cabo Delgado believe some of those youths who were treated so brutally in Montepuez might have been recruited by the insurgents to join their ranks.” 40.1.  Given the placing of the paragraph, a reasonable reader would think that the author is referring specifically to the “tortured” individuals referred to in the preceding paragraphs and not generally people aggrieved by mining activities. There is indeed no basis to speculate that those particular “torture victims” have been recruited by insurgents. 40.2.  The speculation was also unfair towards Gemfields and MRM because they were not asked for comment on this aspect. The question posed to MRM was whether they “think (their) project has contributed to feelings of inequality and alienation that have fed to the insurgency”. This was a valid question with a comprehensive response from the mining companies. 40.3. It is quite something else to speculate that people who were allegedly tortured in 2012 or those who received compensation for (denied) human rights abuses in 2019 have been recruited by insurgents. Complaint 5: The “privileged few” “That means, CIP pointed out, that ‘it becomes difficult [to] identify the beneficiaries of the concessions, which can be Mozambicans in conflict of interest, or even ‘with power and political capacity to influence the dynamics of the sector for their own benefit’. “Where owners of Cabo Delgado’s mining concessions can be identified, however, the names of powerful families such as Chipande, Chissano, Talapa, and Waty crop up…. “Mwiriti issued a statement following CIP’s report, saying that the use of offshore structures was perfectly legal, and mining activities are still carried out in-country. CIP’s researchers suggested, meanwhile, that the lack of transparency over who really owns mining concessions ‘may be behind land conflicts’ in Cabo Delgado… “But if greater transparency only reveals the true extent to which Mozambique’s riches are concentrated in the hands of a privileged few, then deeper changes will be needed to overcome the resentment that is contributing to unrest in Cabo Delgado.” Complaint 6: Deaths due to collapse of the mines “Meanwhile, artisanal mining continues on MRM’s concession, despite the best efforts of police and private security to crack down on the activity. MRM said that it knew of 21 people who died while mining illegally on its concession in 2020, and a further eight by the start of August this year. Most of the deaths were due to the collapse of mines they had dug.” Complaint 7: “Mwriti earned $17.9-million” Complaint 8: The offshore issue “But the CIP report raises another concern: the company has apparently shifted ownership of its mining concessions offshore, to a mysterious company called Nairoro Resources Holdings, domiciled in Mauritius – known as Africa’s tax haven.” Complaint 9: The headline Conclusion Appeal The Complaints Procedure lays down that within seven working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Herman Scholtz Deputy Press Ombud 10 February 2022 