 Complaint 9507 Date of articles:                  14 March 2022 Headline of publication:   “Has Jurie Roux captured SA Rugby?”   Author:                                  Adriaan Basson Particulars The rejected complaint “A complaint shall be made as soon as possible, but not later than 20 working days after the date of publication giving rise to the complaint. The Public Advocate, who throughout the entire process (also at the Ombudsman and the Appeals Panel) will advise and assist the complainant if the complainant agrees, may on reasonable grounds accept late complaints if, in his or her opinion, there is a good and satisfactory explanation for the delay.” “(Roux) instituted proceedings in the Western Cape High Court on 3 March 2022 in which he seeks to review and set aside the awards of Adv Sholto-Douglas SC and the Appeal Tribunal. It was appropriate for him to wait until all papers were filed in the application (namely the University’s answering affidavit and his replying affidavit) before addressing Mr Basson’s article.” Analysis 13.1 The first is paragraph 1.3. which empowers the Public Advocate to accept a complaint despite the non-compliance with the          procedures. This procedure is a discretion vested in the Public Advocate in the spirit of creating a non-technical and efficient complaints procedure for members of the public. Even if the Public Advocate accepts the complaint, there is nothing in my view that would prohibit a respondent publication from objecting to the late filing of the application. Where the Public Advocate declines to exercise this discretion, the complainant may still in terms of paragraph 1.8. of the Complaints Procedure call upon the Ombudsman or Deputy Ombudsmen to intervene. 13.2 The second route is paragraph 6.1.1. that empowers the Ombudsman and Chair of Appeals, depending on the context, to extend any time period contemplated in the rules. This provides for condonation to be granted. “As we have repeatedly said in the past, and indeed as the Code says, there must be an adequate explanation for a delay. The longer the delay, the more cogent the explanation should be.” 17.1 The publication raising the issue (as opposed to the Public Advocate); and 17.2 The appellant already having had an opportunity for the case to be ventilated through an adjudication process. 19.1 The preamble of the Code declares that “the media exist to serve society”. The preamble proceeds to state how the media, and their voluntary submission to the Press Code, aims to realise this ideal: “As journalist we commit ourselves to the highest standards, to maintain crediblility and keep the trust of the public.” The commitment is espoused in the activities in the Press Council of South Africa. 19.2 Independent co-regulation of the media has as its premise the need for an efficient, simple, credible, alternative dispute resolution process. The spirit of the Code is not to place unnecessary and technical restrictions on complainants. The previous Ombud, in the matter of SA BDS Coalition vs SA Jewish Report, also held that the Council’s “objectives of efficient, effective, informal and inexpensive dispute resolution” is a weighty consideration when considering what could be termed as technical restrictions in the complaints procedure. In Mathys vs EWN[2] I held that the Press Council’s procedures should not be applied in an overly technical or strict way. To do so would serve as an unjustified tool of exclusion of seemingly valid complaints. 19.3 The Ombudsman’s activities are to the benefit of both complainants and respondent publications. It offers a credible alternative to litigation. It affords both parties an opportunity to be vindicated. Where a publication is not raising an objection to the late filing of a complaint, it could deprive them of an opportunity to be vindicated through a hearing of the merits instead of a technicality. 21.1 The extent of the delay 21.2 The explanation for the delay 21.3 The prejudice to be suffered by the complainant and the publication if the condonation is granted or refused 21.4 The importance of the issues raised and the complainant’s reasonable prospects of success (or lack thereof) in the complaint. In general, condonation should be more readily granted where there are strong merits in a complaint. 28.1 The need for speedy resolution of complaints. The longer the delay, the less likely the Public Advocate ought to be to accept the complaint. 28.2 The nature of the complaint. The allegations by the complainant, if found to be true, must at least constitute a breach of the Press Code. The more serious the allegations are on face value, the more inclined he should be to accept it. 28.3 The reasonableness of the explanation for the delay. While an explanation is imperative (see Spotlight Publications cited above), a reasonable, well-motivated explanation for the delay carries far more weight than a sketchy reason. 28.4 The consideration that a rejection of the complaint effectively closes the door on a complainant without having had the opportunity to state their case. Application of principles 34.1 I have not granted condonation to the complainant in terms of paragraph 6.1.1. of the Complaints Procedure. The respondent publication is at liberty to raise an objection to the late filing of the complaint, in which event the relevant submissions of the parties will be considered in a condonation application. The publication may also choose not to object to the late filing of the complaint and to address only the merits of the complaint. 34.2 What I have done, is to set aside the Public Advocate’s decision to reject the complaint in terms of paragraph 1.8. of the Complaints Procedure. Conclusion Appeal The Complaints Procedure lays down that within seven working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Herman Scholtz Deputy Press Ombud 16 May 2022 [1] Matter 4257/02/2019, 12 March 2020. [2] Complaint 8980, 7 July 2021  