 Complaint 9458 Ruling by the Deputy Press Ombud Date of articles:                  27 February 2022 (print and online) Headline of publication:   “Prasa chair ‘tried to settle dodgy R4.5bn contract” (Sunday Times) “Prasa chair embroiled in fallout from unlawful R4.5bn contract” (TimesLive) Author:                               Thanduxolo Jika Particulars Background to the complaint 7.1 Agree to an independent engineer, or to approach the Court to appoint such independent engineer. 7.2 The engineer’s task will be to do a valuation of all the work already performed by Siyangena. 7.3 Prasa and Siyangena then must agree on the value of the work that has been performed (or approach the Court if there is no agreement). 7.4 Prasa and Siyangena must finally calculate how much money Prasa already paid to Siyangena and apply set-offs. If Prasa paid Siyangena more money than the value of the work performed, Siyangena must refund Prasa. Similarly, if the work performed is more than the amount already paid, Prasa must pay the difference to Siyangena. 17.1 Ramatlakane is accused of “working to settle a dodgy R4.5bn contract that was ruled unlawful and invalid by a full bench of the high court in Pretoria”. 17.2 Ramatlakane arranged a meeting with Mario Ferreira, owner of Siyangena, to discuss settlement proposals. 17.3 The contract in question is being investigated by the Hawks. 17.4 “Instead of acting to ensure that Siyangena received no more of Prasa’s money” Ramatlakane wanted to find an “amicable solution that is beneficial to both” Prasa and Siyangena. 17.5 “Despite Siyangena’s contract being investigated by the Hawks, and Prasa having won its civil case against the company, Ramatlakane sought a legal opinion in July last year to guide Prasa on a ‘roundtable discussion with Siyangena’ and whether there would be any benefit in negotiating a settlement.” The complaint “The Sunday Times and TimesLive articles, notwithstanding the submissions I made to the publications, seek to advance the narrative that I, acting on my own volition and without the necessary Board authority, initiated settlement negotiations with Siyangena with the aim of ensuring that Siyangena benefits financially.” 21.1 Alleged omissions from Ramatlakane’s response to the publications. This speaks to Clause 1.2. of the Code which requires publications to “present news in context and in a balanced manner, without any intentional or negligent departure from the facts whether by distortion, exaggeration or misrepresentation, material omissions, or summarization”. 21.2 Alleged distortions of facts to serve a “narrative” that Ramatlakane acted in his own interest and without Board authority in initiating settlement negotiations with Siyangena with the aim of ensuring that Siyangena benefits financially. This also relates to Clause 1.2. 21.3 An alleged factual inaccuracy, being the statement that Ramatlakane sought a legal opinion while it was, in fact, Prasa who sought the opinion. Clause 1.1. is applicable to this category. The media shall take care to report news truthfully, accurately, and fairly. Ramatlakane’s response 24.1 “Ramatlakane denied ever meeting Ferreira and said he only wrote to him to communicate a board decision that the meeting with Siyangena could go ahead. He did not respond to why he became involved in an operational matter.” 24.2 “‘There was nothing sinister or illegal about the meeting in issue…The letter communicated the decision of the board that the meeting could go ahead,’ Ramatlakane said.” 24.3 “‘The board’s response to any matter is within an assessment of the benefit towards Prasa and the wellbeing of the commuters.’” The “narrative” 29.1 “However, instead of acting to ensure that Siyangena received no more of Prasa’s money, Ramatlakane responded in September last year to a letter Ferreira wrote asking for a meeting about their ‘ongoing litigation’, to explore an amicable situation that is beneficial to both Siyangena and Prasa.” 29.2 “Despite Siyangena’s contract being investigated by the Hawks, and Prasa having won its civil case against the company, Ramatlakane sought a legal opinion in July last year to guide Prasa on a ‘roundtable discussion with Siyangena’ and whether there would be any benefit in negotiating a settlement.” 29.3 “‘This thing was run solely as an operation purely by the chair, no one else… He had no business talking to the Siyangena CEO,’ said a source close to Prasa.” Publications’ response “We deny that our story accused Mr Ramatlakane of being a mastermind to ensure Siyangena benefitted from a settlement between Prasa and itself. We did raise questions about why Mr Ramatlakane was involved, or appeared to be driving, operational matters rather than Mr Matthews. And we did raise questions about whether the decisions pursued were in Prasa’s best interests. We did not go further than this. These are legitimate questions to ask and are in the public interest.” 33.1 “Documents seen by the Sunday Times indicate that Leonard Ramatlakane agreed to, and arranged, a meeting between Prasa executives and Mario Ferreira…” 33.2 “Ramatlakane wrote:…Prasa confirms its willingness to meet with you…” 33.3 “Ramatlakane” sought a legal opinion “to guide Prasa” in the process. “No more money” “However, instead of acting to ensure that Siyangena received no more of Prasa’s money, Ramatlakane responded in September last              year to a letter Ferreira wrote asking for a meeting about their ‘ongoing litigation’, to explore an amicable situation that is beneficial to              both Siyangena and Prasa.” “As for the phrase "instead of acting to ensure that Siyangena received no more of Prasa's money", we submit the context of the story makes it clear that Mr Ramatlakane is expected to ensure that Siyangena did not receive more money than it was entitled to. “We submit the narrow reading that Prasa should literally not pay out any more money to Siyangena is only one possible reading of the sentence, and not necessarily the most reasonable?. The phrase certainly does not amount to an omission, distortion or inaccuracy of the judgment. In addition to the context explained above, the phrase was not presented as a quote or finding of the court. Nor did the story report on the particulars of the judgment - it concerned, rather, the conduct of Mr Ramatlakane after Prasa's court victory.” “The reading of the judgment suggested that parties should engage in the calculation towards settlement which must be submitted to the high court for payment order. “It’s clear that both Prasa and Siyangena would have hard negotiations on matters.” “How would a report without reading the judgment make this suggestion that a matter that was discussed by the board would favour Siyangena?” 44.1 “The insider said: ‘Prasa doesn’t have to pay Ferreira a cent, he can appeal as many times as he wants. That contract was dodgy and courts have ruled in Prasa’s favour and it should defend that.” 44.2 “Another insider told the Sunday Times this week: ‘There is absolutely no reasonable prospect of success for Siyangena to win that case. It doesn’t make sense why Ramatlakane would even entertain any discussions about a possible settlement because that contract was ruled by a full bench of judges to be invalid and unlawful.’” Alleged factual inaccuracy Conclusion 56.1 It should state the omitted fact as summarised in paragraph 50 above. 56.2 The apology should appear at the top of the online article. 56.3 The apology should appear either on page 2 of the Sunday Times or the page where the original article appeared. 56.4 The wording of the apology must be approved by the Deputy Ombudsman prior to publication. 56.5 The apology must contain a hyperlink to the full ruling (online article) and reference to www.presscouncil.org.za (print edition) where the full ruling may be found. Appeal The Complaints Procedure lays down that within seven working days of receipt of this decision, either party may apply for leave to appeal to the Chairperson of the SA Press Appeals Panel, Judge Bernard Ngoepe, fully setting out the grounds of appeal. He can be contacted at Khanyim@ombudsman.org.za. Herman Scholtz Deputy Press Ombud 16 May 2022 